# Notebook spec for Joel (among others)
## One preliminary note...
Maybe this doesn't need saying, but laptops are about trade-offs. I have yet to see a laptop that is the combination of *everything* I would want, at least not in the price range I'd be willing to consider. And salivating over laptops that are out my price range is fun once in a while, but it gets old pretty quickly. Along those lines, once you make a decision and money gets put down, *stop looking.* Unless there is something actually wrong with your laptop and needs warranty attention or repair, continuing to look at options once you've made a purchase is going to make you a little bonkers. You've got other, more important places to be putting your energy.

## Some considerations
While there are some overlapping concerns about keyboard and display, probably the two most salient factors when looking at laptops, in my opinion, what a writer needs and what an engineer would need diverge in some key areas. I mention keyboard and display first because while high performace is definitely a concern, especially for running computationally intensive applications, the keyboard and display are the number one/two places where the human element breaks down. Things like mushy or imprecise key actions and a blurry, washed out display will quicken user fatigue and diminish user experience in ways that are not always readily apparent. Because they're somewhat harder to quantify, however, manufacturer specifications won't or can't include them, beyond perhaps specifying graphics card specs or display resolution. User reviews, especially by sources that have experience using a variety of hardware, are a good source of information, but the due diligence is on you to look at a variety of sources too. At one time, I would have said Amazon is a pretty good place for user reviews, but in looking at them now, it's apparent to me that there's a good bit of gaming going on with the reviews. That's not supposed to happen, but it does. More than ever, *caveat emptor.*

## Contrasting Use Cases
With that said, my considerations when elder sib and I were looking at laptops were: decent display/graphics, above average keyboard and light weight. The manufacturer played a part to some degree. I have my biases, to be sure, but I don't think they're *entirely* misplaced. For trouble-free operation, I tend toward Lenovo, Hewlett-Packard and Dell. By and large, they make quality products, although that varies across their respective product lines. Basically, you get what you pay for. I suppose I have less favourable impressions of Acer, ASUS, Samsung, LG and MSI. By the way, I really wanted to like MSI and ASUS. They make some top-notch component hardware, but I see a lot of mixed reviews about their laptops. And again, these are *my impressions.* People have good experiences with them and I have not personally used any of them, so mileage may vary.

I should also throw in battery life, but extended periods of time away from a power source are unusual and hopefully can be anticipated. One option you have that elder sib did not is that some laptops can be charged over a USB C connection. It's still a bit uncommon, but I really think it's something that needs to catch on. Hauling a wall-wart around, the only purpose of which is to charge up the battery, is one of those necessary annoyances that laptop users have had to contend with from the very beginning. If you think this is going to be an issue, though, we should factor that in.

My reasoning behind those emphases had mainly to do with how a writer uses a laptop. Keyboard quality is important for a writer, who might spend periods of time with sustained typing and looking at the monitor. Light weight and battery life are factors because they allow for a degree of freedom and flexibility. For engineers, that's more of a "nice to have."

Another thing to think about is the fact that engineering involves more working with numbers, so a separated numeric keypad makes that considerably easier. It's one reason why I like having an external keyboard that I can attach by USB or Bluetooth. Having a numeric keypad on the laptop keyboard is nice, but only if you expect to spend a lot of time number-crunching and having an external keyboard is not feasible.

Now to performance. Since you have a course syllabus that specifically called out the need to consider graphics, there are a few things to be said about graphics cards on laptops. Broadly speaking, there are two styles, integrated and discrete. Integrated graphics cards share memory with the system itself. Their performance is decent, but not up to that of discrete cards, since there is a degree of splitting between system operations and graphics processing. The benefits with integrated cards are battery life and operating temperature, although both of those are affected by how intensively the application is leaning on the graphics capability of the machine. The big player for integrated graphics is Intel UHD. Most decent business laptops use it and it's what's on my Lenovo. I don't game a lot and it's fine for anything I've ever thrown at it. I haven't tried to do anything way out, so my impressions are largely based on things I've read. Discrete graphics cards are, as the name suggests, separated from the main system and use a high speed bus to communicate. They run a separate system for processing graphic data and some applications can make use of that capacity to share the load for computationally intensive activities. They have their own memory and microprocessor, seperate from those of the main system. This is the main reason they are preferred by serious gamers, since high performance graphics impose a substantial load on system resources and having a seperate system specialized and dedicated to the type of computational operations involved in high-end graphics processing makes sense. The trade off here, as you'd expect, is heat and energy i.e. battery life. The two big players in discrete graphics are NVidia and AMD/Radeon. Overall, for laptops, I see and hear more about NVidia and they've been pretty much dominant for a while.

I don't pay a *whole lot* of attention to things like processor speed. That used to be the main benchmark of a system's performance, but with the advent of multi-core processors, more sophisticated graphics options, higher bandwidth system buses and higher performance system memory, system performance is a more wholistic measure that can't be pinned on one aspect of the system. I think Intel has a bit of an edge here. It's the platform I have more familiarity and experience with, but in the last few years, AMD has come out with Ryzen, a high performance platform to rival Intel's Core platform. I have to admit, I don't know much about it, but on the high end, I've read that it's a serious contender. How much that applies to laptops, I can't say. In my looking, Ryzen shows up in a few places on laptops, but it's still in the minority. Really, in all the areas I've mentioned here (performance, battery life, heat generation etc) they're pretty much a blank slate, so I'm going to have to leave that to you to research, if you're interested.

## "If you don't want sugar, don't stir..."
I hope you find this rather brief brain dump helpful. I've tried to stick to stuff where I'm reasonably confident of my knowledge and understanding, but as in all things tech-related, my knowledge can always stand upgrading. It's my two cents, but I like to think the pennies are at least a bit shiny. :)
